JS: docs for customizing library models with data extensions (#11615)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/customizing-library-models-for-javascript.rst

.. _customizing-library-models-for-javascript:

Customizing Library Models for JavaScript
=========================================

.. pull-quote::

   Beta Notice - Unstable API

   Library customization using data extensions is currently in beta and subject to change.

>    Breaking changes to this format may occur while in beta.

Author: Factored the message into a reusable snippet.

The JavaScript analysis can be customized by adding library models in data extension files.

A data extension for JavaScript is a YAML file of form:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: <name of extension point>
      data:
        - <tuple1>
        - <tuple2>
        - ...

The data extension can contribute to the following extension points:

- **sourceModel**\(type, path, kind)
- **sinkModel**\(type, path, kind)
- **typeModel**\(type1, type2, path)
- **summaryModel**\(type, path, input, output, kind)

> TODO: mention how to actually load the data extension and/or link to page about data extensions.

Author: Yep. Either way there should be _something_ here. A link, optionally with an inline quick explanation.

> We'll explain how to use these using a few examples, and provide a `reference <#reference-1>`_ at the end of this article.

Author: Hm, it's really weird that this differs when you build it locally.

> We'll explain how to use these using a few examples, and provide a `reference <#reference-1>`_ at the end of this article.

Reviewer: I used the build-artifact you send me a link to.

> We'll explain how to use these using a few examples, and provide a `reference <#reference-1>`_ at the end of this article.

Author: As far as I can tell there is just no way to get our version of Sphinx to render these links without hardcoding the absolute URL. So I removed intra-document links for now.

  });

We can refine the model by adding the **WithStringArgument** component to restrict the set of calls being considered:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[addEventListener].WithStringArgument[0=message].Argument[1].Parameter[0].Member[data]",
            "remote-flow",
          ]

The **WithStringArgument[0=message]** component here selects the subset of calls to **addEventListener** where the first argument is a string literal with the value **"message"**.

Example: Using types to add MySQL injection sinks
-------------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll show how to add the following SQL injection sink:

.. code-block:: ts

  import { Connection } from "mysql";

  function submit(connection: Connection, q: string) {
    connection.query(q); // <-- add 'q' as a SQL injection sink
  }

We can recognize this using the following extension:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sinkModel
      data:

>         - ["mysql.Connection", "Member[query].Argument[0]", "sql-injection"]

Reviewer 2: Question: Is this equivalent?

```suggestion
        - ["mysql", "Member[Connection].Member[query].Argument[0]", "sql-injection"]
```

And if so, do you have a recommendation for which is better?

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is different because `mysql.Connection` is a type, not a value?

Author: Indeed they are different. What you wrote would correspond to a static method on the `Connection` class.

Reviewer 2: Oh....that's subtle. It makes sense, but it's something that I think many people (including me) would miss without explicit documentation.

Author: Pushed an explanation in [d62b944](https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/11615/commits/d62b944b930b1f9eda97821d341ad2ce7add9103)

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: typeModel
      data:
        - ["mysql.Connection", "@example/db", "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue"]

To break this down:

- Since we're providing type information, we add a tuple to the **typeModel** extension point.
- The first column, **"mysql.Connection"**, names the type that we're adding a new definition for.
- The second column, **"@example/db"**, begins the search at imports of the hypothetical NPM package **@example/db**.
- **Member[getConnection]** selects references to the **getConnection** member from that package.
- **ReturnValue** selects the return value from a call to that member.

The new model states that the return value of **getConnection()** has type **mysql.Connection**.
Combining this with the sink model we added earlier, the sink in the example is detected by the model.

The mechanism used here is how library models work for both TypeScript and plain JavaScript.
A good library model contains **typeModel** tuples to ensure it works even in codebases without type annotations.

> For example, the **mysql** model that is included with the CodeQL JS analysis includes this type definition (among many others):

Reviewer: A tiny example of how you can create types, from other types, would be nice.  

Something like (bad example):  
```
["mysql.Connection", "mysql.Connection", "Member[clone].ReturnValue"]
```

Author: I understand the sentiment behind this, but I can't seem to find a good example to use.

.. code-block:: yaml

  - ["mysql.Connection", "mysql", "Member[createConnection].ReturnValue"]

Reference
=========

Extension points
----------------

sourceModel(type, path, kind)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds a new taint source. Most taint-tracking queries will use the new source.

- **type**: Name of a type from which to evaluate **path**.
- **path**: Access path leading to the source.
- **kind**: Kind of source to add. Currently only **remote-flow** is used.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - ["global", "Member[user].Member[name]", "remote-flow"]

sinkModel(type, path, kind)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds a new taint sink. Sinks are query-specific and will usually affect one or two queries.

- **type**: Name of a type from which to evaluate **path**.
- **path**: Access path leading to the sink.

> - **kind**: Kind of sink to add. See `sink kinds <#sink-kinds>`_ for a list of supported kinds.

Reviewer: The `sink-kind` link doesn't work (the relevant header has `id="id3"`).  
But I suppose that will resolve with the other link issue.

Author: As mentioned earlier, removed the link

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sinkModel
      data:
        - ["global", "Member[eval].Argument[0]", "code-injection"]

> summaryModel(type, path, input, output, kind)

Reviewer: Very optional: You don't have examples above for every extension point except this one. So a small example for this could be nice.  
E.g. `underscore.forEach` for value-flow, and `underscore.template` for taint-flow. 
Or replicate your `decodeURIComponent` example with more details.

Author: Good idea. Added examples for `decodeURIComponent` and `underscore.forEach`.

- **path**: Access path leading to a function call.
- **input**: Path relative to the function call that leads to input of the flow.
- **output**: Path relative to the function call leading to the output of the flow.
- **kind**: Kind of summary to add. Can be **taint** for taint-propagating flow, or **value** for value-preserving flow.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: summaryModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[decodeURIComponent]",
            "Argument[0]",
            "ReturnValue",
            "taint",
          ]

typeModel(type1, type2, path)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds a new definition of a type.

- **type1**: Name of the type to define.
- **type2**: Name of the type from which to evaluate **path**.
- **path**: Access path leading from **type2** to **type1**.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
  - addsTo:
      pack: codeql/javascript-all
      extensible: typeModel
    data:
      - [
          "mysql.Connection",
          "@example/db",
          "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue",
        ]

Types
-----

> A type is a string that identifies a set of values.

Reviewer 2: This makes sense from a PL perspective, but it's not a very javascripty explanation. Can you change this to be more accessible? Maybe:

```suggestion
A type is a string that identifies a set of values that are all related in some way usually by having common properties.
```

Author: > This makes sense from a PL perspective

The sentence isn't about type theory. Would it be less confusing to write it like this:
- A type is a string that identifies a set of expressions in the codebase.

However, they can also refer to synthetic intermediate values that don't have an explicit expression in the codebase, so I settled for the more vague term "value". I just want the reader to have a good working intuition.

Reviewer 2: I think what you have is fine.

In each of the extension points mentioned above, the first column is always the name of a type.
A type can be defined by adding **typeModel** tuples for that type. Additionally, the following built-in types are available:

- The name of an NPM package matches imports of that package. For example, the type **express** matches the expression **require("express")**. If the package name includes dots, it must be surrounded by single quotes, such as in **'lodash.escape'**.

> - The type **global** identifies the global object, also known as **window**. In JavaScript, global variables are properties of the global object, so global variables can be identified using this type. (This type also matches imports of the NPM package named **global**, which is a package that happens to export the global object.)

Reviewer 2: Is `window` a synonym for `global`?  Does it make a distinction of whether or not there is a dom environment? This seems slightly incorrect (or misleading) for non-browser environments.

Author: > Is `window` a synonym for `global`?

In MaD: No, you cannot write `window` as the type and expect it to match `window`.

It's just saying that the global object is also known as `window`, because in a browser environment that variable refers to the global object.

There is currently no way to specifically match references to the global object in a browser context.

Reviewer 2: Maybe change 

> also known as **window**

to

> also known as **window** in browser contexts

Author: Updated to use "also known as window in browser contexts" 👍

- A qualified type name of form **<package>.<type>** identifies expressions of type **<type>** from **<package>**. For example, **mysql.Connection** identifies expression of type **Connection** from the **mysql** package. Note that this only works if type annotations are present in the codebase, or if sufficient **typeModel** tuples have been provided for that type.

Access paths
------------

The **path**, **input**, and **output** columns consist of a **.**-separated list of components, which is evaluted from left to right, with each step selecting a new set of values derived from the previous set of values.

The following components are supported:

- **Argument[**\ `number`\ **]** selects the argument at the given index.
- **Argument[this]** selects the receiver of a method call.
- **Parameter[**\ `number`\ **]** selects the parameter at the given index.
- **Parameter[this]** selects the **this** parameter of a function.
- **ReturnValue** selects the return value of a function or call.
- **Member[**\ `name`\ **]** selects the property with the given name.
- **AnyMember** selects any property regardless of name.

> - **ArrayElement** selects an element of an array.

Reviewer 2: Is there any way to select the `nth` element of an array?

Author: Not in the JavaScript, no.

- **Element** selects an element of an array, iterator, or set object.
- **MapValue** selects a value of a map object.
- **Awaited** selects the value of a promise.
- **Instance** selects instances of a class.

The following components are called "call site filters". They select a subset of the previously-selected calls, if the call fits certain criteria:

- **WithArity[**\ `number`\ **]** selects the subset of calls that have the given number of arguments.
- **WithStringArgument[**\ `number`\ **=**\ `value`\ **]** selects the subset of calls where the argument at the given index is a string literal with the given value.

Components related to decorators:

> - **DecoratedClass** selects a class that has the current value as a decorator. For example, **Member[Component].DecoratedClass** selects any class that is decorated with **@Component**.

Reviewer 2: Since decorators are uncommon, it would be nice to see an example of this.

Author: On the other hand, decorators are uncommon, so the reader most likely won't care. I think if you come to the document motivated by an example that involves decorators, it wouldn't be that hard to figure out how to use these.

- **DecoratedParameter** selects a parameter that is decorated by the current value.
- **DecoratedMember** selects a method, field, or accessor that is decorated by the current value.

Some additional notes about the syntax of operands:

- Multiple operands may be given to a single component, as a shorthand for the union of the operands. For example, **Member[foo,bar]** matches the union of **Member[foo]** and **Member[bar]**.

> - Numeric operands to **Argument**, **Parameter**, and **WithArity** may be given as an interval. For example, **Argument[0..2]** matches argument 0, 1, or 2.

Reviewer 2: Can you do this? `Argument[0..1,4..7]` or `Argument[0,3]`?

- **Member[query]** selects the **query** member from the connection object.
- **Argument[0]** selects the first argument of a call to that member.
- **sql-injection** indicates that this is considered a sink for the SQL injection query.

This works in this example because the **connection** parameter has a type annotation that matches what the model is looking for.

In the next section, we'll show how to generalize the model to handle the absence of type annotations.

Continued example: Dealing with untyped code
--------------------------------------------

Suppose we want the model from above to detect the sink in this snippet:

.. code-block:: js

  import { getConnection } from "@example/db";
  let connection = getConnection();
  connection.query(q); // <-- add 'q' as a SQL injection sink

There is no type annotation on **connection**, and there is no indication of what **getConnection()** returns.
Using a **typeModel** tuple we can tell our model that this function returns an instance of **mysql.Connection**:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: typeModel
      data:

>         - ["mysql.Connection", "@example/db", "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue"]

Reviewer 2: Entirely optional, but do you think that adding some column names here would be helpful?

```suggestion
         # Type,               Import,        Path         
        - ["mysql.Connection", "@example/db", "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue"]
```

Doing something similar above might be nice too.

.. _customizing-library-models-for-javascript:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:orphan:
:nosearch:

```

Customizing Library Models for JavaScript
=========================================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-customizing-library-models.rst

The JavaScript analysis can be customized by adding library models in data extension files.

A data extension for JavaScript is a YAML file of form:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all

>         extensible: <name of extension point>

Reviewer 2: Can you rename _extension point_ to _extensible predicate_? This is the term we are using throughout all our documentation.

Author: This has been renamed

.. _customizing-library-models-for-javascript:

:orphan:
:nosearch:

Customizing Library Models for JavaScript
=========================================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-customizing-library-models.rst

The JavaScript analysis can be customized by adding library models in data extension files.

> A data extension for JavaScript is a YAML file of form:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A data extension for JavaScript is a YAML file of the form:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: <name of extension point>
      data:
        - <tuple1>
        - <tuple2>
        - ...

> The data extension can contribute to the following extension points:

Reviewer 3: The [Java PR](https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/12410/files) used this language:

> "The CodeQL library for Java exposes the following extensible predicates:"

Could we have this here?

```suggestion
The CodeQL library for JavaScript exposes the following extensible predicates:
```

- **sourceModel**\(type, path, kind)
- **sinkModel**\(type, path, kind)
- **typeModel**\(type1, type2, path)
- **summaryModel**\(type, path, input, output, kind)

TODO: mention how to actually load the data extension and/or link to page about data extensions.

We'll explain how to use these using a few examples, and provide some reference material at the end of this article.

Example: Taint sink in the 'execa' package
------------------------------------------

> In this example, we'll show how to add the argument passed to **execa** below as a command-line injection sink:
> 
> .. code-block:: js
> 
>   import { shell } from "execa";
>   shell(cmd); // <-- add 'cmd' as a taint sink
> 
> This sink is already recognized by the CodeQL JS analysis, but for the sake of this example we'll show how it could be added as an extension.
> 
> This can be achieved with the following data extension:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we'll show how to add the following argument, passed to **execa**, as a command-line injection sink:

.. code-block:: js

  import { shell } from "execa";
  shell(cmd); // <-- add 'cmd' as a taint sink

Note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL JavaScript analysis, but for this example, you could use the following data extension:
```

Does this edit make sense? Just aligns it a bit more with the Java PR content and streamlines it slightly, at least in terms of content structure.

Reviewer 3: Makes sense 👍

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sinkModel
      data:
        - ["execa", "Member[shell].Argument[0]", "command-line-injection"]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Likely a bit too idiomatic, particularly for people for whom English isn't a first language; I think it makes sense without

- Since we're adding a new sink, we add a tuple to the **sinkModel** extension point.
- The first column, **"execa"**, identifies a set of values from which to begin the search for the sink.
  The string **"execa"** means we start at the places where the codebase imports the NPM package **execa**.
- The second column is an access path that is evaluated from left to right, starting at the values that were identified by the first column.

  - **Member[shell]** selects accesses to the **shell** member of the **execa** package.
  - **Argument[0]** selects the first argument to calls to that member.

- **command-line-injection** indicates that this is considered a sink for the command injection query.

Example: Taint sources from window 'message' events
---------------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll show how the **event.data** expression below could be marked as a remote flow source:

.. code-block:: js

  window.addEventListener("message", function (event) {
    let data = event.data; // <-- add 'event.data' as a taint source
  });

> This source is already known by the CodeQL JS analysis, but we'll show how it could be added as an extension. This can be achieved with the following extension:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL JavaScript analysis, but for this example, you could use the following data extension:
```

Similar point to above re alignment with Java content

Author: Fixed (see https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/11615#discussion_r1147591771)

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[addEventListener].Argument[1].Parameter[0].Member[data]",
            "remote",
          ]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

As above

- Since we're adding a new taint source, we add a tuple to the **sourceModel** extension point.
- The first column, **"global"**, begins the search at references to the global object (also known as **window** in browser contexts). This is a special JavaScript object that contains all global variables and methods.
- **Member[addEventListener]** selects accesses to the **addEventListener** member.
- **Argument[1]** selects the second argument of calls to that member (the argument containing the callback).
- **Parameter[0]** selects the first parameter of the callback (the parameter named **event**).
- **Member[data]** selects accesses to the **data** property of the event object.
- Finally, the kind **remote** indicates that this is considered a source of remote flow.

> 

Reviewer 3: Would it be possible to add a small note here saying "In the next section, we'll..." as you do in a similar case below?

Author: Added:

> In the next section, we'll show how to restrict the model to recognize events of a specific type.

> Continued example: Restricting the event type
> ---------------------------------------------

Reviewer 3: I'd recommend using RST subsection formatting here:

```suggestion
Restricting the event type
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Reviewer 3: Hmm, would you consider using bold in that case? I'm just thinking because otherwise it looks like it's on the same level as other 'main' examples. Given this is only for internal Hubber use initially, it's not vital that we resolve it now either way, so I'll leave to you.

Author: > I'm just thinking because otherwise it looks like it's on the same level as other 'main' examples.

I have no problem with this. There is one section per example, and it's clearly indicated when an example builds onto the previous one.

> The model above treats all events as sources of remote flow, not just **message** events.
> For example, it would also pick up this irrelevant source:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The model in our example treats all events as sources of remote flow, not just **message** events. It would also pick up the following irrelevant source:
```

Author: No, the "for example" is needed. Otherwise the "also" gets an entirely different meaning, as it suggests that the irrelevant source is _also_ found in addition to matching non-message events. It's an example of a non-message.

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[addEventListener].WithStringArgument[0=message].Argument[1].Parameter[0].Member[data]",
            "remote",
          ]

The **WithStringArgument[0=message]** component here selects the subset of calls to **addEventListener** where the first argument is a string literal with the value **"message"**.

Example: Using types to add MySQL injection sinks
-------------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll show how to add the following SQL injection sink:

.. code-block:: ts

  import { Connection } from "mysql";

  function submit(connection: Connection, q: string) {
    connection.query(q); // <-- add 'q' as a SQL injection sink
  }

We can recognize this using the following extension:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sinkModel
      data:
        - ["mysql.Connection", "Member[query].Argument[0]", "sql-injection"]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

As above

- The first column, **"mysql.Connection"**, begins the search at any expression whose value is known to be an instance of
  the **Connection** type from the **mysql** package. This will select the **connection** parameter above because of its type annotation.
- **Member[query]** selects the **query** member from the connection object.
- **Argument[0]** selects the first argument of a call to that member.
- **sql-injection** indicates that this is considered a sink for the SQL injection query.

> This works for the example above because the **connection** parameter has a type annotation that matches what the model is looking for.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This works in this example because the **connection** parameter has a type annotation that matches what the model is looking for.
```

> In the next section, we'll show how to generalize the model to handle the absense of type annotations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the next section, we'll show how to generalize the model to handle the absence of type annotations.
```

> Continued example: Dealing with untyped code
> --------------------------------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dealing with untyped code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

As above re RST subsection formatting

Author: Same answer as above

> Suppose we want the model from above to detect the sink in this snippet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We may want to use the model in our example to detect the sink in the following snippet:
```

.. code-block:: js

  import { getConnection } from "@example/db";
  let connection = getConnection();
  connection.query(q); // <-- add 'q' as a SQL injection sink

There is no type annotation on **connection**, and there is no indication of what **getConnection()** returns.
Using a **typeModel** tuple we can tell our model that this function returns an instance of **mysql.Connection**:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: typeModel
      data:
        - ["mysql.Connection", "@example/db", "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue"]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

As above

- The second column, **"@example/db"**, begins the search at imports of the hypothetical NPM package **@example/db**.
- **Member[getConnection]** selects references to the **getConnection** member from that package.
- **ReturnValue** selects the return value from a call to that member.

The new model states that the return value of **getConnection()** has type **mysql.Connection**.
Combining this with the sink model we added earlier, the sink in the example is detected by the model.

The mechanism used here is how library models work for both TypeScript and plain JavaScript.
A good library model contains **typeModel** tuples to ensure it works even in codebases without type annotations.
For example, the **mysql** model that is included with the CodeQL JS analysis includes this type definition (among many others):

.. code-block:: yaml

  - ["mysql.Connection", "mysql", "Member[createConnection].ReturnValue"]

Example: Adding flow through 'decodeURIComponent'
-------------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll show how to add flow through calls to `decodeURIComponent`:

.. code-block:: js

  let y = decodeURIComponent(x); // add taint flow from 'x' to 'y'

> This flow is already recognized by the CodeQL JS analysis, but this is how it could be added with an extension:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL JavaScript analysis, but for this example, you could use the following data extension:
```

Author: Fixed (see https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/11615#discussion_r1147591771)

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: summaryModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[decodeURIComponent]",
            "Argument[0]",
            "ReturnValue",
            "taint",
          ]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

As above

> - Since we're adding flow *through* a function call, we add a tuple to the **summaryModel** extension point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Since we're adding flow through a function call, we add a tuple to the **summaryModel** extension point.
```

Minor but italics can be confusing for some users

- The first column, **"global"**, begins the search for relevant calls at references to the global object.
  In JavaScript, global variables are properties of the global object, so this lets us access global variables or functions.
- The second column, **Member[decodeURIComponent]**, is a path leading to the function calls we wish to model.
  In this case, we select references to the **decodeURIComponent** member from the global object, that is,
  the global variable named **decodeURIComponent**.
- The third column, **Argument[0]**, indicates the input of the flow. In this case, the first argument to the function call.
- The fourth column, **ReturnValue**, indicates the output of the flow. In this case, the return value of the function call.
- The last column, **taint**, indicates the kind of flow to add. The value **taint** means the output is not necessarily equal

>   to the input, but was was derived from the input in a taint-preserving way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to the input, but was derived from the input in a taint-preserving way.
```

Example: Adding flow through 'underscore.forEach'
-------------------------------------------------

In this example, we'll show how to add flow through calls to **forEach** from the **underscore** package:

.. code-block:: js

  require('underscore').forEach([x, y], (v) => { ... }); // add value flow from 'x' and 'y' to 'v'

> This flow is already recognized by the CodeQL JS analysis, but we'll show how it could be added with an extension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this sink is already added to the CodeQL JavaScript analysis, but for this example, you could use the following data extension:
```

Author: Fixed (see https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/11615#discussion_r1147591771)

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: summaryModel
      data:
        - [
            "underscore",
            "Member[forEach]",
            "Argument[0].ArrayElement",
            "Argument[1].Parameter[0]",
            "value",
          ]

> To break this down:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

As above

> - Since we're adding flow *through* a function call, we add a tuple to the **summaryModel** extension point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Since we're adding flow through a function call, we add a tuple to the **summaryModel** extension point.
```

As above

- The fourth column specifies the output of the flow:

  - **Argument[1]** selects the second argument of **forEach** (the argument containing the callback function).
  - **Parameter[0]** selects the first parameter of the callback function (the parameter named **v**).

- The last column, **value**, indicates the kind of flow to add. The value **value** means the input value is unchanged as
  it flows to the output.

Reference material
------------------

The following sections provide reference material for extension points, access paths, types, and kinds.

Extension points
----------------

sourceModel(type, path, kind)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds a new taint source. Most taint-tracking queries will use the new source.

- **type**: Name of a type from which to evaluate **path**.
- **path**: Access path leading to the source.
- **kind**: Kind of source to add. Currently only **remote** is used.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: sourceModel
      data:
        - ["global", "Member[user].Member[name]", "remote"]

sinkModel(type, path, kind)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Adds a new taint sink. Sinks are query-specific and will usually affect one or two queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Adds a new taint sink. Sinks are query-specific and will typically affect one or two queries.
```

Very minor but more standard language in context and easier for English-2nd-language readers

- **input**: Path relative to the function call that leads to input of the flow.
- **output**: Path relative to the function call leading to the output of the flow.
- **kind**: Kind of summary to add. Can be **taint** for taint-propagating flow, or **value** for value-preserving flow.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
    - addsTo:
        pack: codeql/javascript-all
        extensible: summaryModel
      data:
        - [
            "global",
            "Member[decodeURIComponent]",
            "Argument[0]",
            "ReturnValue",
            "taint",
          ]

typeModel(type1, type2, path)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adds a new definition of a type.

- **type1**: Name of the type to define.
- **type2**: Name of the type from which to evaluate **path**.
- **path**: Access path leading from **type2** to **type1**.

Example:

.. code-block:: yaml

  extensions:
  - addsTo:
      pack: codeql/javascript-all
      extensible: typeModel
    data:
      - [
          "mysql.Connection",
          "@example/db",
          "Member[getConnection].ReturnValue",
        ]

Types
-----

A type is a string that identifies a set of values.

> In each of the extension points mentioned above, the first column is always the name of a type.

Reviewer 3: I wasn't 100% clear what you were referring to with "above" here: is there possibly a different way to express it?

Author: Replaced "above" with "previous section".

A type can be defined by adding **typeModel** tuples for that type. Additionally, the following built-in types are available:

- The name of an NPM package matches imports of that package. For example, the type **express** matches the expression **require("express")**. If the package name includes dots, it must be surrounded by single quotes, such as in **'lodash.escape'**.
- The type **global** identifies the global object, also known as **window**. In JavaScript, global variables are properties of the global object, so global variables can be identified using this type. (This type also matches imports of the NPM package named **global**, which is a package that happens to export the global object.)
- A qualified type name of form **<package>.<type>** identifies expressions of type **<type>** from **<package>**. For example, **mysql.Connection** identifies expression of type **Connection** from the **mysql** package. Note that this only works if type annotations are present in the codebase, or if sufficient **typeModel** tuples have been provided for that type.

Access paths
------------

> The **path**, **input**, and **output** columns consist of a **.**-separated list of components, which is evaluted from left to right, with each step selecting a new set of values derived from the previous set of values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The **path**, **input**, and **output** columns consist of a **.**-separated list of components, which is evaluated from left to right, with each step selecting a new set of values derived from the previous set of values.
```

- **AnyMember** selects any property regardless of name.
- **ArrayElement** selects an element of an array.
- **Element** selects an element of an array, iterator, or set object.
- **MapValue** selects a value of a map object.
- **Awaited** selects the value of a promise.
- **Instance** selects instances of a class.

The following components are called "call site filters". They select a subset of the previously-selected calls, if the call fits certain criteria:

- **WithArity[**\ `number`\ **]** selects the subset of calls that have the given number of arguments.
- **WithStringArgument[**\ `number`\ **=**\ `value`\ **]** selects the subset of calls where the argument at the given index is a string literal with the given value.

Components related to decorators:

- **DecoratedClass** selects a class that has the current value as a decorator. For example, **Member[Component].DecoratedClass** selects any class that is decorated with **@Component**.
- **DecoratedParameter** selects a parameter that is decorated by the current value.
- **DecoratedMember** selects a method, field, or accessor that is decorated by the current value.

> Some additional notes about the syntax of operands:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional notes about the syntax of operands:
```

- Multiple operands may be given to a single component, as a shorthand for the union of the operands. For example, **Member[foo,bar]** matches the union of **Member[foo]** and **Member[bar]**.
- Numeric operands to **Argument**, **Parameter**, and **WithArity** may be given as an interval. For example, **Argument[0..2]** matches argument 0, 1, or 2.
- **Argument[N-1]** selects the last argument of a call, and **Parameter[N-1]** selects the last parameter of a function, with **N-2** being the second-to-last and so on.

Kinds
-----

Source kinds
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **remote**: A generic source of remote flow. Most taint-tracking queries will use such a source. Currently this is the only supported source kind.

Sink kinds
~~~~~~~~~~

> Unlike sources, sinks tend to be highly query-specific, rarely affecting more than one or two queries. Not every query supports customizable sinks. If there is no suitable sink kind below, it is best to add a new query instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike sources, sinks tend to be highly query-specific, rarely affecting more than one or two queries. Not every query supports customizable sinks. If the following sinks are not suitable for your use case, you should add a new query.
```

Does this edit make sense?

- **code-injection**: A sink that can be used to inject code, such as in calls to **eval**.
- **command-line-injection**: A sink that can be used to inject shell commands, such as in calls to **child_process.spawn**.

> - **path-injection**: A sink that can be used for path injection in a file system access, such as in a calls to **fs.readFile**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **path-injection**: A sink that can be used for path injection in a file system access, such as in calls to **fs.readFile**.
```

This works in this example because the **connection** parameter has a type annotation that matches what the model is looking for.

Note that there is a significant difference between the following two rows:

.. code-block:: yaml

        data:
        - ["mysql.Connection", "", ...]
        - ["mysql", "Member[Connection]", ...]

> The first row matches instances of **mysql.Connection** which are objects that encapsulate a MySQL connection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first row matches instances of **mysql.Connection**, which are objects that encapsulate a MySQL connection.
```

Super minor suggestion, but also using this to say if there is a simpler word than "encapsulate" I'd recommend it

Author: "encapsulate" is a commonly used term in programming literature, I think it should be fine here

Reviewer 3: Cool 👍
